== HTTP API

The Eventline HTTP API lets users access the various features of the platform
in a programmatic way.

=== Interface

==== Endpoint

The API is available on a separate endpoint. The HTTP
interface is configured by the `api_http_server` setting. See the
<<configuration-specification,configuration documentation>> for more
information. The default port is 8085.

==== Authentication

Access to the API requires a valid <<api-keys,API key>>. Authentication is
based on the HTTP `Authorization` header field with the `Bearer` scheme.

For example, for the fictional API key `082ef11a-908f-4fae-819c-eb98b7fd98f6`,
requests must include the following header field:

----
Authorization: Bearer 082ef11a-908f-4fae-819c-eb98b7fd98f6
----

==== Project selection

Most API routes operate on a specific <<chapter-projects,project>>. This
project must be identified in each request by sending its identifier using the
`X-Eventline-Project-Id` header field.

For example, for a fictional project whose identifier is
`23B1NoaoigGQfmiP9PB9X2nJh4W`, requests must include the following header
field:

----
X-Eventline-Project-Id: 23B1NoaoigGQfmiP9PB9X2nJh4W
----

When an API route does not depend on a project, the `X-Eventline-Project-Id`
can be omitted from the request.

TIP: In order to obtain the identifier of a project using its name, you can
use the `GET /projects/name/{name}` route to fetch the project by name and
read the `id` field.

==== Error handling

The Eventline API uses conventional HTTP status codes to indicate success or
failure. In general, 2xx status codes indicate success, 4xx status codes
indicate an error caused by the request, and 5xx status codes indicate an
error in the Eventline platform.

Error responses sent by Eventline servers will contain a body representing an
<<data-errors,error object>>.

CAUTION: It is possible to receive error responses with a body which is not
encoded in JSON, for example for errors coming from a load balancer or reverse
proxy. Clients should use the `Content-Type` header field to determine the
format of the body. Errors originating from Eventline API servers will always
have the `application/json` content type.

==== Pagination

Various API routes return collections of elements. Most of these routes use
pagination to group elements.

Paginated routes return a single object representing the page, i.e. the
required subset of the collection of elements.

[#data-cursors]
===== Cursors

Pagination is controlled by cursors. A cursor contains the parameters
controlling the selection of elements to be returned and their order.

Each cursor contains the following parameters:

`before` (optional string) :: An opaque key; return elements positioned before the
element designated by the key in the defined order.

`after` (optional string) :: An opaque key; return elements positioned after the element designated by the key in the defined order.

`size` (optional integer, default to 20) :: The number of elements to return,
between 0 and 100.

`sort` (optional string) :: The sort to apply to elements. Different types of
elements support different sorts; all elements support the `id` sort. The
default sort depends on the type of the element.

`order` (optional string, default to `asc`) :: The order to use for elements,
either `asc` for ascending order or `desc` for descending order.

Cursors must include one and only one of the `before` and `after` parameters.

===== Requests

When sending requests to fetch elements, the cursor is passed using HTTP query
parameters. The `before` and `after` parameters must be Base64-encoded (see
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648[RFC 4648]).

For example, sending a request to
`/jobs?after=TWpOQ2VFTlZOVVJvT1RCQ00xaFdSalJWY210WGNtNXFaRU5Q&size=5&order=id&order=desc`
will result in a response containing up to 5 jobs at position
`MjNCeENVNURoOTBCM1hWRjRVcmtXcm5qZENP` in the whole list of pipelines ordered
by id.

All paginated requests may result in pages containing less elements that the
number required using the `size` parameter.

===== Responses

When cursors are sent in responses, for example to indicate the previous or
next page, they are represented as JSON objects.

For example:

[source,json]
----
{
  "after": "MjNCeENVNURoOTBCM1hWRjRVcmtXcm5qZENP",
  "size": 5,
  "order": "id",
  "order": "desc"
}
----

The response to a paginated query is a single <<data-pages,page object>>.

=== Data

==== Data format

Unless mentioned otherwise, requests and responses contain data formatted
using https://www.json.org[JSON] as described by
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8259[RFC 8259].

Note that as mandated by RFC 8259, JSON documents must be encoded used UTF-8
and must not start with a BOM (Byte Order Mark).

[#data-errors]
==== Errors

Error objects contain the following fields:

`error` (string) :: A human-readable description of the error.

`code` (string) :: An error code identifying the precise reason which caused
the error.

`data` (optional value) :: A value, usually an object, containing additional
data related to the error.

.Example
[source,json]
----
{
  "error": "route not found",
  "code": "route_not_found",
  "data": {
    "target": "\/foo\/bar"
  }
}
----

==== Identifiers

Most objects in Eventline are referenced by their unique identifier. Identifiers
are https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9562[UUIDs]. They are represented
in JSON by strings containing the textual representation of the UUID, e.g.
`"01994918-57e6-7eb7-a6aa-932e8601b224"`.

==== Names

Names are used as human-readable identifiers for various elements.

Names must only contain lower case alphanumeric characters, dash characters
('-') or underscore characters ('_'); they must also start an alphanumeric
character. For example, "build-archive" and "run\_http\_test\_42" are valid
names; "-register" and "Send Notifications" are not. Additionally, names must
contain at least one character, and must not contain more than 100 characters.

==== Dates

Dates are represented as JSON strings containing the
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3339[RFC 3339] representation of the
date and time.

For example, `"2021-10-15T15:07:39Z"` is a valid date.

Eventline always represents dates using Coordinated Universal Time (UTC).

[#data-pages]
==== Pages

The response to a paginated query is a page, represented by a JSON object
containing the following fields:

`elements` (array) :: The list of elements contained in the page.

`previous` (optional object) :: The <<data-cursors,cursor>> corresponding to
the previous page if there is one.

`next` (optional object) :: The <<data-cursors,cursor>> corresponding to the
next page if there is one.

.Example
[source,json]
----
{
  "elements": [
    {
      "id": "22bQgVViNfTUAaToCrk9fMXPGsj",
      "name": "project-1",
    },
    {
      "id": "23E0dGLAnH943qkNMvMEZeFsWya",
      "name": "project-2",
    }
  ],
  "next": {
    "after": "MjNFMGRHTEFuSDk0M3FrTk12TUVaZUZzV3lh",
    "size": 2,
    "sort": "name",
    "order": "asc"
  }
}
----

[#data-accounts]
==== Accounts

Accounts are represented as JSON objects containing the following fields:

`id` (identifier) :: The identifier of the account.

`creation_time` (date) :: The date the account was created.

`username` (string) :: The name of the user owning the account. The username
must contain at least 3 characters and no more than 100 characters.

`role` (string) :: The role of the account, either `user` or `admin`.

`last_login_time` (optional date) :: The date of the last time someone used
this account to access Eventline.

`last_project_id` (optional identifier) :: The identifier of the last project
selected as current project for this account.

`settings` (object) :: An object containing settings used by the account.

[#data-projects]
==== Projects

Projets are represented as JSON objects containing the following fields:

`id` (identifier) :: The identifier of the project.

`name` (name) :: The name of the project.

[#data-jobs]
==== Jobs

Jobs are represented as JSON objects containing the following fields:

`id` (identifier) :: The identifier of the job.

`project_id` (identifier) :: The identifier of the project the job is part of.

`creation_time` (date) :: The date the job was created.

`update_time` (date) :: The date the job was last modified.

`disabled` (optional boolean, default to `false`) :: Whether the job is
disabled or not.

`spec` (object) :: The specification of the job. See the
<<job-specification,job documentation>> for more information.

[#data-job-executions]
==== Job executions

Job executions are represented as JSON objects containing the following
fields:

`id` (identifier) :: The identifier of the execution.

`project_id` (identifier) :: The identifier of the project the execution is
part of.

`job_id` (identifier) :: The identifier of the job.

`job_spec` (object) :: A copy of the <<job-specification,specification>> of
the job.

`event_id` (optional identifier) :: If the job execution was triggered by an
event, the identifier of the event.

`parameters` (optional object) :: If the job was executed without any event,
the set of parameters used.

`creation_time` (date) :: The date the execution was created.

`update_time` (date) :: The date the execution was last modified.

`scheduled_time` (date) :: The date execution is supposed to start.

`status` (string) :: The current status of the execution, either `created`,
`started`, `aborted`, `successful` or `failed`. See the
<<job-execution-lifecycle,job execution documentation>> for more information.

`start_time` (optional date) :: The date execution started.

`end_time` (optional date) :: The date execution ended.

`refresh_time` (optional date) :: The date execution was last refreshed. See
the <<job-execution-timeout,job execution documentation>> for more
information.

`expiration_time` (optional date) :: The date the job execution will be
deleted for being too old.

`failure_message` (optional string) :: If execution failed, the last error
message encountered.

[#data-events]
==== Events

Events are represented as JSON objects containing the following fields:

`id` (identifier) :: The identifier of the event.

`project_id` (identifier) :: The identifier of the project the event is
part of.

`job_id` (identifier) :: The identifier of the job at the origin of the event.

`creation_time` (date) :: The date the event was created.

`event_time` (date) :: The date the event actually happened.

`connector` (string) :: The name of the connector.

`name` (string) :: The name of the event.

`data` (object) :: The set of data contained by the event. Depends on the
connector and name. See the documentation of the event in the
<<chapter-connectors,connector section>> for more information.

`processed` (optional boolean, default to `false`) :: Whether the event was processed
for job instantiation or not.

`original_event_id` (optional identifier) :: If the event is associated with a
<<event-replay,replayed event>>, the identifier of the original event.

.Example
[source,json]
----
{
  "id": "22gBNze4y3o57HpES4WC8MwKvwo",
  "project_id": "1zY1y6offsPNwvhFxgpteVO0GvM",
  "job_id": "22g5sGMNkKvAtoH1BBMP2aDtUGb",
  "creation_time": "2021-12-23T08:48:33Z",
  "event_time": "2021-12-23T08:48:32Z",
  "connector": "github",
  "name": "push",
  "data": {
    "branch": "test",
    "new_revision": "f1d2d2f924e986ac86fdf7b36c94bcdf32beec15",
    "old_revision": "62cdb7020ff920e5aa642c3d4066950dd1f01f4d",
    "organization": "example",
    "repository": "my-project"
  }
}
----

[#data-identities]
==== Identities

Identities are represented as JSON objects containing the following fields:

`id` (identifier) :: The identifier of the identity.

`project_id` (identifier) :: The identifier of the project the identity is
part of.

`name` (name) :: The name of the identity.

`status` (string) :: The current status of the identity, either `pending`,
`ready` or `error`.

`error_message` (optinoal string) :: If the identity has status `error`, a
description of the error.

`creation_time` (date) :: The date the identity was created.

`update_time` (date) :: The date the identity was created.

`last_use_time` (optional date) :: The last time the identity was used.

`refresh_time` (optional date) :: The last time the identity was refreshed for
identities which must be refreshed regularly.

`connector` (string) :: The name of the connector.

`type` (string) :: The type of the identity.

`data` (object) :: The set of data contained by the identity. Depends on the
connector and type. See the documentation of the identity in the
<<chapter-connectors,connector section>> for more information.

.Example
[source,json]
----
{
  "id": "2X7hQLbWL5iQa6z17pMnXFlbqtP",
  "project_id": "1zY1y6offsPNwvhFxgpteVO0GvM",
  "name": "bob-account",
  "status": "ready",
  "creation_time": "2023-10-22T16:47:04Z",
  "connector": "generic",
  "type": "password",
  "data": {
    "login": "bob",
    "password": "67d4155eb1840d15f2bb67a481d88ee5d11770081ac2a810"
  }
}
----

=== Routes

==== Accounts

===== `GET /account`

Fetch the account of the API key used to send the request. The response is an
<<data-accounts,account object>>.

==== Projects

===== `GET /projects`

Fetch a paginated list of projects.

The response is a page of <<data-projects,project objects>>.

===== `POST /projects`

Create a new project.

The request must be a JSON object containing the following field:

`name` (name) :: The name of the project.

The response is the <<data-projects,project object>> which was created.

===== `GET /projects/id/{id}`

Fetch a project by identifier.

The response is a <<data-projects,project object>>.

===== `GET /projects/name/{name}`

Fetch a project by name.

The response is a <<data-projects,project object>>.

===== `PUT /projects/id/{id}`

Update an existing project.

The request must be a JSON object containing the following field:

`name` (name) :: The name of the project.

The response is the modified <<data-projects,project object>>.

===== `DELETE /projects/id/{id}`

Delete a project by identifier.

==== Jobs

===== `GET /jobs`

Fetch a paginated list of jobs.

The response is a page of <<data-jobs,job objects>>.

===== `PUT /jobs`

Deploy a set of jobs in the current project. If jobs already exist with the
same names, they are updated. If not, new jobs are created. The operation is
atomic: if one of the job cannot be deployed, none will be.

The request is an array of <<job-specification,job specification objects>>.

The response is an array of <<data-jobs,job objects>> representing the jobs
created or updated from the specifications.

If the `dry-run` query parameter is set, Eventline validates job
specifications but does not deploy them.

===== `GET /jobs/id/{id}`

Fetch a job by identifier.

The response is a <<data-jobs,job object>>.

===== `DELETE /jobs/id/{id}`

Delete a job by identifier.

===== `GET /jobs/name/{name}`

Fetch a job by name.

The response is a <<data-jobs,job object>>.

===== `PUT /jobs/name/{name}`

Deploy a single job in the current project. If a job already exists with this
name, it is updated; if not, a new job is created.

The request is a <<job-specification,job specification object>>.

The response is a <<data-jobs,job object>> representing the job created or
updated from the specifications.

If the `dry-run` query parameter is set, Eventline validates the job
specification but does not deploy it.

===== `POST /jobs/id/{id}/rename`

Rename a job. The request is a JSON object containing the following fields:

`name` (string) :: The new name of the job.

`description` (optional string) :: The new description of the job.

NOTE: Renaming a job will affect its specification: if the job is deployed
from a job specification file, you will have to update it manually.

===== `POST /jobs/id/{id}/enable`

Enable a job by identifier. Nothing is done if the job is already enabled.

===== `POST /jobs/id/{id}/disable`

Disable a job by identifier. Nothing is done if the job is already disabled.

===== `POST /jobs/id/{id}/execute`

Execute a job by identifier.

The request is a JSON object containing the following field:

`parameters` (object) :: The set of parameters to use for execution.

The response is a <<data-job-executions,job execution object>>.

==== Job executions

===== `GET /job_executions/id/{id}`

Fetch a job execution by identifier.

The response is a <<data-job-executions,job execution object>>.

===== `POST /job_executions/id/{id}/abort`

Abort a created or started job execution by identifier.

===== `POST /job_executions/id/{id}/restart`

Restart a finished job execution by identifier.

==== Events

===== `GET /events`

Fetch a paginated list of events.

The response is a page of <<data-events,event objects>>.

===== `GET /events/id/{id}`

Fetch an event by identifier.

The response is an <<data-events,event object>>.

===== `POST /events/id/{id}/replay`

Replay an event by identifier.

==== Identities

===== `GET /identities`

Fetch a paginated list of identities.

The response is a page of <<data-identities,identity objects>>.

===== `POST /identities`

Create a new identity.

The request must be a JSON object containing the following field:

`name` (name) :: The name of the identity.

`connector` (string) :: the name of the connector.

`type` (string) :: the type of the identity.

`data` (object) :: the set of data associated with the identity.

The response is the <<data-identities,identity object>> which was created.

NOTE: Identities requiring a web browser such as OAuth2-based identities
cannot be created using the API.

===== `GET /identities/id/{id}`

Fetch a identity by identifier.

The response is a <<data-identities,identity object>>.

===== `GET /identities/name/{name}`

Fetch a identity by name.

The response is a <<data-identities,identity object>>.

===== `PUT /identities/id/{id}`

Update an existing identity.

The request must be a JSON object containing the following field:

`name` (name) :: The name of the identity.

`connector` (string) :: the name of the connector.

`type` (string) :: the type of the identity.

`data` (object) :: the set of data associated with the identity.

The response is the modified <<data-identities,identity object>>.

===== `DELETE /identities/id/{id}`

Delete a identity by identifier.
